blog: March 2026 blog post (#59)
AerynOS/dotcom: src/content/docs/blog/2026/03/31/March 2026 project update/index.md

The development work this month has centered around the features we offer in terms of automating recipe updates and how we can better support bootstrap builds on the boulder side, along with the usual clean-up and refactoring work across the moss and boulder code bases.

Lastly, we want to take a moment to thank Framework for their on-going hardware sponsorship of our project. This month, they have provided the project with an AMD AI 300 based Framework 16 that Joey Riches is now using as a dedicated device for AerynOS development.

## What’s new in the distro

Package / stack updates for this iteration include:

- GNOME 50.0
- KDE Frameworks 6.24.0
- KDE Gear 25.12.3
- KDE Plasma 6.6.3
- awww 0.12.0
- dankmaterialshell 1.4.4
- firefox 149
- fish 4.6.0
- fresh 0.2.20
- jujutsu 0.39.0
- linux 6.18.19
- mangowm 0.12.7
- mesa 26.0.2
- pipewire 1.6.2
- qemu 10.2.2
- riftbar 0.1.8
- thunderbird 149.0
- wine 11.5
- dash 0.5.13.2
- wlroots 0.19.3
- wayland 1.25.0
- maven 3.9.14
- gparted 1.8.1
- kitty 0.46.1
- systemd 257.13
- zls 0.15.1
- sudo-rs 0.2.13
- llvm 22.1.1
- Qt6 6.11.0

... along with sundry additions and updates.

## Desktop Updates

> ### Gnome

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### GNOME
```

![Gnome Install](Gnome.png)

> This month sees a significant update to the GNOME stack with the delivery of [GNOME 50](https://release.gnome.org/50/). We have not received any reports of any issues but if you do find any bugs, please do report back to us via [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/AerynOS/recipes/issues) or through our [Zulip](https://aerynos.zulipchat.com/) community.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This month sees a significant update to the GNOME stack with the delivery of [GNOME 50](https://release.gnome.org/50/). We have not received any reports of any issues but if you do find any bugs, please report back them to us via [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/AerynOS/recipes/issues) or through our [Zulip](https://aerynos.zulipchat.com/) community.
```

As part of our content delivery strategy, we had already moved to using a CDN for delivering updates through moss on our Unstable repository. This month, we have made the transition to also using the CDN for our Volatile repository as well.

The Volatile repository is primary used for those who do their own packaging and/or submit packages to our repository. This change helps speed up downloads for those users as they disproportionately engage with our repositories for packaging purposes.

We have updated our documentation accordingly, so if you do any packaging work on AerynOS, please refer to the updated documentation on our [dotdev](https://aerynos.dev/packaging/workflow/) site.
 
### moss: Search for binaries

Moss searching has been updated to add the ability to search by binary provider. 

Currently, the command line to do so is `moss search --provides some-binary`

Example:

```
$ moss search --provides cat
uutils-coreutils   Cross-platform Rust rewrite of the GNU coreutils
```

The current implementation is somewhat limited, and work is ongoing to improve and generalise this functionality.

### moss: Enable removal of ranges of states

> Moss works by utilizing a Content Adressable Storage architecture. This means that all package related files are stored in a deduplicated manner in the CAS and then hardlinked to transaction numbers /usr trees. This has the benefit of allowing for all historic states of a system to be kept without significant overhead of duplicating the majority of all data, as would happen with simple snapshots.

Reviewer 2: Addressable.

## What’s new in the distro

Package / stack updates for this iteration include:

- GNOME 50.0
- KDE Frameworks 6.24.0
- KDE Gear 25.12.3
- KDE Plasma 6.6.3
- awww 0.12.0
- dankmaterialshell 1.4.4
- firefox 149
- fish 4.6.0
- fresh 0.2.20
- jujutsu 0.39.0
- linux 6.18.19
- mangowm 0.12.7
- mesa 26.0.2
- pipewire 1.6.2
- qemu 10.2.2
- riftbar 0.1.8
- thunderbird 149.0.1
- wine 11.5
- dash 0.5.13.2
- wlroots 0.19.3
- wayland 1.25.0
- maven 3.9.14
- gparted 1.8.1
- kitty 0.46.1
- systemd 257.13
- zls 0.15.1
- sudo-rs 0.2.13
- llvm 22.1.1
- Qt6 6.11.0

... along with sundry additions and updates.

## Desktop Updates

### GNOME

![Gnome Install](Gnome.png)

This month sees a significant update to the GNOME stack with the delivery of [GNOME 50](https://release.gnome.org/50/). We have not received any reports of any issues but if you do find any bugs, please report them back to us via [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/AerynOS/recipes/issues) or through our [Zulip](https://aerynos.zulipchat.com/) community.

Some key updates include:

- Improved parental controls
- VRR and Fractional Scaling are now stable and enabled by default

> - Wayland only, coming in line with AerynOS' default of having no X11 session

Reviewer: I don't think "default" really makes sense here? How about:

```suggestion
- Dropped support for X11, which we didn't support in AerynOS to begin with
```

Though really that's not an update (however it's phrased) ^^

> Plus many more features and fixes. 

Reviewer: Stray trailing space

### KDE Plasma

![KDE Install](KDE_Plasma.jpg)

KDE Plasma has been updated to [6.6.3](https://kde.org/announcements/plasma/6/6.6.3/), KDE Frameworks to 6.24.0 and KDE Gear to 25.12.3.

The latest KDE Plasma update brings:

> - KWin's screencasting feature has become robust when using PipeWire 1.6 or newer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- KWin's screencasting feature has become more robust when using PipeWire 1.6 or newer
```

"robust"ness feels more like a spectrum than an absolute? If you get what I mean?

- Reduced CPU and GPU load for full-screen windows for screens using more fractional scale factors
- Improve support for mice with high-resolution scroll wheels in the built-in remote desktop server

### Wayland Compositor Environments

> Our packaging community has really taken to the Wayland Compositor Environment choice we have in AerynOS. With new packagers getting involved with AerynOS, we are seeing faster package updates and submissions for packages that specifically enhance people's ability to rice their environments just the way they like them.

Reviewer: Is "rice" a slang we should be using? I still find it a bit weird myself, no idea where it comes from. Alternative for this sentence: "configure"

A few key updates this month include:

- mangowm 0.12.7
- dankmaterialshell 1.4.4
- elephant 2.20.3
- bluetui 0.8.1
- impala 0.7.4
- awww 0.12.0

> - riftbar 0.1.8

Reviewer: 'the heck are all these? 😂

On top of this, several packages have been rebuilt for better performance, support or defaults. The default terminal in our Sway package set has been swapped from alacritty to foot as this is the default terminal proposed by Sway itself. Elephant has had upstream support for moss included and this version has now been added to our own repository. Niri has seen a few upstream improvements backported into our repository also.

## Infrastructure and Tooling Updates

### Use CDN for the default volatile stream

> As part of our content delivery strategy, we had already moved to using a CDN for delivering updates through moss on our Unstable repository. This month, we have made the transition to also using the CDN for our Volatile repository as well.

Reviewer: I'm guessing this is optional (different repo URL, so existing installs have to opt into it)? If that's the case, I'd rephrase to something like

```suggestion
As part of our content delivery strategy, we were already offering a CDN for delivering Unstable repository moss packages. This month, we have set up the CDN to provide the Volatile repository as well.
```

> The Volatile repository is primary used for those who do their own packaging and/or submit packages to our repository. This change helps speed up downloads for those users as they disproportionately engage with our repositories for packaging purposes.

Reviewer: Grab-bag of simplifications / rewordings because I like simple, direct language. Feel free to discard anything that you feel is not an improvement.

```suggestion
The Volatile repository is primarily used for packagers. This change helps speed up downloads for them as they engage a lot with our repositories for their packaging efforts.
```

We have updated our documentation accordingly, so if you do any packaging work on AerynOS, please refer to the updated documentation on our [dotdev](https://aerynos.dev/packaging/workflow/) site.
 
### moss: Search for binaries

Moss searching has been updated to add the ability to search by binary provider. 

Currently, the command line to do so is `moss search --provides some-binary`

Example:

```
$ moss search --provides cat
uutils-coreutils   Cross-platform Rust rewrite of the GNU coreutils
```

The current implementation is somewhat limited, and work is ongoing to improve and generalize this functionality.

### moss: Enable removal of ranges of states

> Moss works by utilizing a Content Addressable Storage architecture. This means that all package related files are stored in a deduplicated manner in the CAS and then hardlinked to transaction numbers /usr trees. This has the benefit of allowing for all historic states of a system to be kept without significant overhead of duplicating the majority of all data, as would happen with simple snapshots.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moss is underpinned by Content Addressable Storage. This means that all package-related files are stored in a deduplicated manner in the CAS and then hardlinked to transaction numbers /usr trees. This has the benefit of allowing all historic states of a system to be kept without significant overhead of duplicating package contents many times, as would happen with simple snapshots.
```

Is the `/usr` in there meant to be an inline code block? Is a word missing between "numbers" and "/usr"?
